---
layout: post
title: "The Difference between は and Ga"
author: "hedera"
categories: journal
tags: [japanese]
image: spools.jpg
published: false
---

Confusion between the Japanese particles は and が has plagued elementary Japanese learners for as long as they've existed. [It's like a curse upon starting learners everywhere that two of the most fundamental words in Japanese are also the easiest to ] Although native Japanese speakers are able to use these particles as easily as they breathe and can tell when someone has misused one in place of the other, most can only provide an explanation of the grammatical system behind them that is at best, an incomplete picture, and at worst, inaccurate. The usage of は and が can feasibly be taught through a few simple lessons, but for newcomers to Japanese and language learners in general, the comprehensive resources available can seem long-winded and daunting, especially if the explanation uses complicated linguistics terminology. This is why elementary Japanese textbooks opt for simple rules-of-thumb and offer explanations that may not be technically accurate. I don't necessarily disagree with this approach. は and が is best acquired through listening and reading to actual usage, as is true for most Japanese grammar points. It's important not to intimidate or confuse newcomers to Japanese right at the beginning of their learning journey. 

That being said, the simple explanations will eventually break down once the learner starts becoming overly aware of usages of は and が in the wild. They may suddenly notice a usage of ha that they feel が would fit into better and then find that they can't explain to themselves why one is used over the other. Poring over these small hangups while studying Japanese is not conducive to effectively learning the language. But given that ha and が are so fundamental to Japanese, I think it's understandable that a learner will eventually want to know a comprehensive model of は/が. In this article, I hope provide that model in the most simple terms possible. This article is not for beginners. I've written this article with intermediate and advanced learners in mind, as it serves little benefit to people who don't already have a basis of intuition with は and が.

# Understand the Role of は, が, and を

The Japanese language has a special concept known as the "topic" that's very prevalent compared to other languages. When something becomes the topic, we know that what comes after it will explain something about the topic. は is commonly understood as a topic marker, and が as a subject marker. In other words, whatever comes immediately before は becomes the topic, and whatever comes immediately before が is the subject. However, it is also very common for は to mark (come after) a subject. This is where confusion between は and が arises from. 

When は marks a subject, this does /not/ mean the subject has ceased to be a subject and is now a topic. It's both a topic and subject at the same time. This is called topicalization: the subject has been topicalized because it is now marked by wa.

父がこの本を買ってくれた(こと)[^1]
父はこの本を買ってくれた。

[^1] The こと is here to represent that this is not being interpreted as a complete sentence, but a clause.

What sets が apart from other common markers is that when は topicalizes something that is already marked by が, が is dropped from it completely. You will never hear "ここがは". This also happens with を.

<div class="container" style="display:flex; text-align: center; flex-wrap: wrap; align-items: center;">
    ここが   + は ー> ここは
    ここを   + は ー> ここは
    ここに   + は ー> ここには
    ここで   + は ー> ここでは
    ここへ   + は ー> ここへは
    ここと   + は ー> こことは
    ここから + は ー> ここからは
    ここまで + は ー> ここまでは
</div>

Wa can also mark objects, which are generally marked by を. The object is topicalized, and は replaces を. Just like the subject, the object doesn't stop being an object when it's topicalized.

//

が can be used to mark an object too, but only with stative-transitive verbs. A more or less exhaustive list of these verbs is: aru (to have), dekiru, iru (to need), kikoeru, mieru, wakaru, -tai form, and the potential form. 

//

Learners sometimes make the mistake of marking an object with が when the verb that follows is not a stative-transitive verb. The particle used in this case should always be は or を.

//


# Exclusive が

が has an exceptional usage that takes precedent over all other rules that I will describe in this article. You may have also seen this form of が referred to before as exhaustive-listing が, or exhaustive が.

Sometimes, が can be used where は is normally used in order to *emphasize the subject*. With this particular usage of が, the subject that が marks is singled out from a pool of other possible subjects. Consider the following two sentences.

 - Watashi は Tarou desu.

 - Watashi が Tarou desu.
 
The first sentence is a declaration of what the speaker's name is. Tarou may say this to answer the question, "What is your name?" when he's meeting someone new.

The second sentence specifies that the speaker is Tarou. Tarou may say this to answer the question, "Who here is Tarou?"

Exclusive が can always be 

# Contrastive は

Just like exclusive ga, contrastive は is an exceptional usage that takes precedent over all other rules going forward.

When the speaker brings up a subject in order to compare an attribute of that subject with that of other possible subjects, they may use contrastive wa.

Ame は hutteimasu ga, yuki は hutteimasen

Contrastive は commonly appears with negated verbs.

## The 「象は鼻が長い。」 Construction

「象は鼻が長い。」 is a famous sentence in discussions of Japanese grammar because of linguist Akira Mikami. In 1960, Mikami published 『象ハ鼻ガ長イナア！』, in which he argued that this sentence has no subject and advocated for the dismissal of the idea of "subject" in Japanese. We'll subscribe to Mikami's interpretation of the sentence but keep the idea of the subject intact.

According to Mikami's view, 「象は鼻が長い。」 is a sentence formed from the clause 「象の鼻が長い(こと)」 by topicalizing the modifier 象の. Through this view, it becomes clear to us that the 「象は鼻が長い。」 construction is just another way of topicalizing a portion of existing sentences/clauses. The noun being topicalized in this construction is *the modifier of a case-marked word*.

Notice that the が in this construction is not necessarily exclusive が. We are simply stating that elephants "have long trunks," not specifying what part of elephants is long.

// Another important thing to note about the 「象は鼻が長い。」 construction is that it's very common for the predicate to express a *state* or *quality* of the topic instead of an *action*.

Sentences that derive from topicalization of the modifier「~の」 in 「~の~を...」 can also be grouped into the 「象は鼻が長い。」 construction. These sentences take predicates that express actions often.

## The 「かき料理は広島が本場だ。」 Construction

At first glance, this sentence seems to fit into the 「象は鼻が長い。」 construction we just saw because of the 「~は~が...」 pattern. However, we can't work backwards to find the untopicalized clause by just replacing 「~は~が...」with 「~の~が...」 like we did with「象は鼻が長い。」 

If we try anyway, we get ×「かき料理の広島が本場(であること)」, which makes no sense. This is because 「かき料理は広島が本場だ。」 is actually derived from 「広島がかき料理の本場(であること)」. In this construction, the noun being topicalized is the *modifier of the predicate*. [^2]

[^2] There is a reason why I haven't labeled the topic in this chart as a "topic/subject". I've also done this for the next construction, 「辞書は新しいのがいい。」. Although it is technically possible to construe the topic in this construction as a subject, in practice this is irrelevant. The reason is that in the model of generative grammar that Noda accepts, 「かき料理は広島が本場だ。」 does not pass through the stage 「かき料理が広島が本場だ。」.「辞書は新しいのがいい。」 passes through the stage 「辞書が新しいのがいい(こと)」, but Noda says that this is irrelevant because it's a highly unstable stage.

The が in this construction is exclusive が. This is a major difference between this construction and the 「象は鼻が長い。」 construction. We're specifying that it's Hiroshima, not any other place like Sendai or Hamamatsu, that's famous for its oyster dishes. 

Because of this, it's possible to invert the sentence 「かき料理は広島が本場だ。」 into 「かき料理の本場は広島だ。」, but inverting the sentence 「象は鼻が長い。」into ×「象が長いのは鼻だ。」 is awkward. See [Inversion]() for clarification on why this happens. 「象は鼻が長い。」is a specification sentence, and 「かき料理は広島が本場だ。」is a supposition sentence.

## The 「辞書は新しいのがいい。」 Construction

Here's another construction that fits into the 「~は~が...」 pattern. In the sentence 「辞書は新しいのがいい。」, the modifier is 新しい, and the noun that was topicalized is 辞書. To derive this sentence from its original clause, we topicalize its *subject*, and the modifier of the subject becomes the subject in the new sentence.

There are two types of sentences that fall into this construction: the selective type and the parallel type.

「辞書は新しいのがいい。」is an example of a selective type-sentence of this construction. The nuance here is that of all dictionaries, we select only the set of those that are new and say they're the best. We're specifying that we prefer new dictionaries, as opposed to old dictionaries, small dictionaries, blue dictionaries, etc. Thus, selective-type sentences of this construction use exhaustive が.

The parallel type-sentence of this construction, on the other hand, doesn't use exhaustive が. These sentences start with the topic + は, followed by several clauses that contain が. An example of one of these sentences is:

全国製麺連が調べた一人当り麺類消費量の全国平均は、うどんが年間1.9キロ、ラーメン類が2.8キロ、そばが0.6キロ。

## The 「花が咲くのは7月ごろだ。」 Construction

What sets this construction apart from all the other ones we've seen so far is that the topic in this one is actually a *clause*. 

The function of this sentence is that the predicate (7月ごろ) is emphasized. It is the focus of our sentence.

Notice that because we can't put は directly after 花が咲く, we have to nominalize the clause first with の. This also happened with the sentence 「辞書は新しいのがいい。」. Common nominalizers include の, もの, 人, and ところ.

## 「このにおいはガスが漏れてるよ。」 Construction

This construction is the rarest one of all we've seen so far. In fact, some would consider it ungrammatical. However, we shouldn't fall into prescriptivism. As you will see later, these sentences have legitimate functions. We can't construct a topicalization chart for this one, so instead, here's a primer on the three major types of this construction you will encounter.

1. The Redundant Type

Sometimes, we cannot reduce a sentence to its basic case marker structure because some portion of the sentence has been repeated before and after は, making it redundant. An example of this is:

500円硬貨の両替は、左側5番の機械で両替してください。

The redundant portion of this sentence is 両替. This sentence is an overlapping of the two following sentences:

500円硬貨の両替は、左側5番の機械でしてください。

500円硬貨は、左側5番の機械で両替してください。

By repeating the redundant portion, we can tell that the speaker may have been trying to make their message clearer.

2. The Omissive Type

Another reason we might not be able to reduce a sentence is because some portion of the sentence has been left out.

いまのうちの会社のいいところは、雰囲気が自由なんですね。

This sentence would be typical if we instead structured it like so:

いまのうちの会社のいいところは、雰囲気が自由なことなんですね。

This type of sentence occurs often in spoken Japanese. 

3. The Inexact Type

Sentences with a predicate that don't semantically serve as an exact explanation of the topic fall into this category.

作り方は、材料を弱火で1時間ほど煮込みます。

The topic, 作り方, only serves as a rough "headline" for the entire sentence that follows it. It does not function as a subject in any capacity.


# Nominal Sentences

A sentence with a noun as its predicate is a nominal sentence. Most nominal sentences use は to mark its subject/topic. Think of は as the default particle to mark the subject/topic in nominal sentences. Nominal sentences will always have a topic, which will either be present in the sentence or only implied through context.

//

There are several reasons が might be used instead of は to mark the subject in nominal sentences. One reason is exclusive ga, when the subject is singled out from other possible subjects.

## Exclusive が and New/Old Information

Depending on the context of the sentence, there may have already been a topic established previously in the discourse. In a typical nominal sentence, the topic is "old information," and the predicate is "new information". 

To clearly define new information and old information:
 - Old information is known to the listener. It can be something present at the scene of the conversation, something previously mentioned in the text, or something the speaker knows the listener knows about.
 - New information is unknown to the listener.
 
 To illustrate this concept clearly, it's easiest to use an example. Imagine that a teacher has asked you the following question:

Nihon no syuto ha doko desu ka?

The most straightforward way of answering this question would be to replace doko with Tokyo. We can answer like so:

Nihon no syuto ha Tokyo desu.

Notice how the topic/subject (nihon no syuto) is marked with は. It's the old information in this sentence, because at the time of answering our teacher's question, we know that our teacher is asking about Japan's capital. The information that is presumably unknown to our teacher, and which we must answer with (Tokyo) is the new information.
 
There is, however, another way to answer the question:

Tokyo が nihon no syuto desu.

Now the new information comes first in our sentence. Notice that it is marked with exclusive ga. The nuance of this sentence is that we are specifying that Tokyo is the capital of Japan.

So what's happened to the topic of our sentence? Since there's no は, does this mean that this answer doesn't have a topic?

No. The topic of this sentence is the same as it was in our first answer: nihon no syuto. It's just that now, the topic is the predicate of the sentence and isn't marked with wa. When the topic is inside of the sentence, but not marked with wa, it's called an unmarked topic (indai).

### Inversion

From the last example, we can generalize that by reversing the order of the topic and the predicate in a typical nominal sentence, we can express the predicate as the new subject and our topic as the new predicate of the sentence. But we must mark the new information with exclusive ga.[^1] In other words:

A は B da = B が A da

This process is called inversion. We've inverted the sentence by switching the places of the old and new information.

[^1]This usage of が gives rise to the rule of thumb that, "Important information comes after は and before が." There are, however, caveats to this rule. 

1. It's possible sometimes for the focus of the sentence to come after ga.
2. The rule is only broadly true for the main clause and doesn't apply to wa/が in subordinate clauses.
3. In verbal and adjectival sentences, the entirety of the sentence is new information if neutral-description が is used.
4. In ryakudaibun, the entirety of the sentence is new information.

Inversion doesn't work with all sentences, though. We call sentences where inversion doesn't work "supposition sentences," (soteibun) and sentences where inversion works "specification sentences" (shitei bun). The sentence we just looked at is a specification sentence. The following is an example of a supposition sentence:

Inu は doubutu da.

Let's try inverting this sentence just like we did with the last example.

× Doubutu が inu da.

This sentence is ungrammatical. 

Why can some sentences be inverted, and others can't? The answer lies in the semantic meaning of the topic and the predicate. 

 - A sentence where the topic and the predicate refer to the same thing is a specification sentence.
 - A sentence where the topic and the predicate do not refer to the same thing is a supposition sentence.

## Implied Topic (Ryakudaibun) in Nominal Sentences

Another reason why a nominal sentence might use が instead of は is because the topic is not actually in the sentence, but implied through context. Consider the sentences:

Hi が tettekita. Kumo が kireta no da.

The second sentence is a nominal sentence because of the nominalizer no. A learner might mistakenly parse the sentence like so:

× (Kumo) <subject が (kireta no) <noun predicate da.

This is wrong because the predicate of the sentence is not kireta no. No is not just nominalizing kireta, it's nominalizing the entirety of kumo が kireta. The correct way to parse this sentence is:

((Kumo) <subject が kireta no) <noun predicate da.

The topic of the sentence is implied by the previous sentence. The text first brings up the fact that the sun has started to shine. The fact that the sun has started to shine is now old information and it can become the topic. It would be natural to follow up with the reason why the sun has started to shine.

Hi が tettekita. (Sore ha) <implied topic Kumo が kireta kara(no) da.

Notice that this usage of が does not necessarily imply that Kumo is especially new or important information compared to the rest of the sentence. Compared to the indai sentence, the entirety of the ryakudai sentence (the noun predicate) is new information. This type of が is the same type that appears in subordinate clauses. You can think of this sentences as one subordinate clause + da. 


# Adjectival Sentences

A sentence with an adjective as its predicate is an adjectival sentence. Most adjectival sentences use は to mark its subject/topic. Think of は as the default particle to mark the subject/topic in adjectival sentences. Adjectival sentences sometimes don't have a topic.

Adjectival sentences function like nominal sentences. That is, the principle of new/old information, inversion, and ryakudai still work.

割引使ってフードロスを防ぐのはすごくいいな

However, adjectival sentences also have two other usages of が called neutral-description ga. Neutral-description が can't be used with nominal sentences, but it is commonly used in adjectival sentences and verbal sentences.

The following sections will discuss reasons why が could mark a subject instead of は in adjectival sentences.

## Implied Topic in Adjectival Sentences

Before we discuss the two additional usages of が in adjectival sentences, I just want to point out that adjectival sentences make use of implying the topic (ryakudai) very often, more than nominal sentences. It is easy to confuse this usage of が with the next usage we'll cover. Here's an example of ryakudai with an adjectival sentence. A native Japanese speaker hears you speak and says,

nihongo が jouzu desu ne

Here, the implied topic is anata, as in "(Anata ha) nihongo が jouzu desu ne."

## Neutral-description Ga: Sentences with No Topic

Tsuki ha kirei desu

Tsuki が kirei desu

The first sentence here is a subjective judgment on the nature of the moon--that it is beautiful. The topic tsuki is old information and the predicate kirei is new information.

The second statement has no topic and it uses neutral-description ga. When neutral-description が marks a subject, the nuance of the sentence is that you are making an objective description (not a subjective judgment), and that what you are describing is temporary or changing. An simpler way to put it is that you should use neutral-description が when you're seeing something with your own eyes and you want to express what you see neutrally. 

If neutral-description が marks the subject in a adjectival sentence, the *entire sentence*, not just the subject, is new information.

It's much less common to see neutral-description が in adjectival sentences than the regular wa.

## Object-marking Ga



# Verbal Sentences

A sentence with a verb as its predicate is a verbal sentence. Verbal sentences have a tendency to use neutral-description が to mark its subject. Think of が as the default particle to mark the subject in verbal sentences. Verbal sentences often don't have a topic.

The principle of new information functions differently in verbal sentences from how it does in nominal sentences. It is important to note that if neutral-description が marks the subject in a verbal sentence, the *entire sentence*, not just the subject, is new information. This is the same as how neutral-description が works in adjectival sentences. But unlike in adjectival sentences, neutral-description が is much, much more common in verbal sentences.

## The Topic in Verbal Sentences

